---
layout: post
title:  "Blurred Lines when it comes to musical ownership"
date: 2021-12-14 18:45:00 
categories: final
img: taylor.png
author: Eliza DuBose
categories: [one]
---


When the Grammys announced the nominees on November 23, many in the music industry raised their eyebrows to see Taylor Swift and Jack Antonoff among those nominated for album of the year: not just for their album “Evermore”, but also for co-writing Olivia Rodrigo’s “Sour.” Considering that neither Swift nor Antonoff or Annie Clark (who’s collaborated with Swift in the past and is also nominated for “Sour”) actively wrote any Rodrigo’s “Sour”, many were perplexed by the Academy’s nod to Swift and her collaborators. On Sunday night the Recording Academy, the entity responsible for the Grammy awards, [rectified the mistake](https://www.billboard.com/music/awards/taylor-swift-olivia-rodrigo-grammy-2022-nomination-adjustment-1235005995/), citing a mistake in paperwork. The Recording Academy’s confusion is yet another chapter in a long story about the difference between copyright infringement and paying proper homage to the artistic influences that came before. According to analysis of case data, musical copyright cases have been increasing in frequency over the past decade with significant increases in the past five years, raising increasing complex questions about musical ownership in the 21st century.

For Rodrigo, the controversy over her alleged theft culminated in September, when she [made headlines by giving up millions in royalties](https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/benhenry/olivia-rodrigo-paramore-good-4-u-taylor-swift-deja-vu) through granting retroactive songwriting credit to Taylor Swift for her song “déjà vu”. Rodrigo announced the additional credits after months of speculation online and a couple of a little too YouTube perfect mashups caused by many fans to point out that “déjà vu” bore a strong resemblance to Swift’s “Cruel Summer”, accusing the singer of artistic theft. 

While some applauded Rodrigo’s move (one Tik-Toker even [encouraged his followers to “keep narking”](https://www.tiktok.com/@luxxuryxx/video/7000462584503667973?referer_url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.dazeddigital.com%2F&referer_video_id=7000462584503667973&refer=embed&is_copy_url=1&is_from_webapp=v1), many musical experts raised concerns on Rodrigo’s crediting artists who had no active part of the songwriting process as ‘songwriters’. Some wondered if Rodrigo’s acknowledgment that Taylor Swift was one of her largest musical influences in multiple interviews was just as responsible for the accusations of stealing as the actual musical similarities.
This idea of influence seems to be the true catch in the case of Rodrigo’s transgressions. Reporting on Rodrigo’s use of yelling vocals in the Bridge of “déjà vu” (similar vocals in Swift’s “Cruel Summer”) is almost always mentioned in connection with Rodrigo’s admittance in an interview that Swift was one of her greatest influences and inspirations. As Adam Neely, a bassist and YouTube music educator [put it in his video on the Rodrigo controversy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qX7a2p5_JsM&t=376s): “… Olivia Rodrigo was wearing her influence on her sleeve just a little too brightly for some folks.”  This strategy, of using artists’ own admittance of influence as evidence for musical theft, is eerily similar to one employed by the Gaye family in 2015 in the infamous court case surrounding Pharrell Williams and Robin Thicke’s song “Blurred Lines”.

## Musical Copyright in the Courts
In 2015 the Gaye estate won their copyright case against Williams and Thicke for infringement on Marvin Gaye’s 1977 song “Got to Give it Up”. The Gaye Estate’s complaint dedicates several pages to Thicke’s long proclaimed admiration of Gaye’s, citing his homage to the R&B legend as the introductory evidence that the artist could’ve committed copyright infringement. The Gaye estate then specifically claimed that the 2013 hit “Blurred Lines” copied [“signature phrase, vocal hook, backup…”](https://blogs.law.gwu.edu/mcir/case/pharrell-williams-et-al-v-frankie-gaye-et-al/) from Marvin Gaye’s original.
The big hitch with that complaint? [Until that point](https://www.rollingstone.com/pro/features/music-copyright-lawsuits-chilling-effect-935310/), such secondary musical elements (i.e., elements other than melody, harmony, and rhythm) were not subject to copyright. When the Gaye’s won their case in 2015 (although appeals would last till 2018), they essentially won in copywriting a musical vibe, rather than just a specific melody or musical element. Previously, musical copyright protected what was understood to be ideas in artistic expression, not the expression themselves. 

As Peter Jaszi, Professor Emeritus at American University College of Law, explained, “The standard line on that is that copyright in music…doesn’t protect the style. Anyone can try to write like Hemmingway and even if they’re very successful the Hemmingway estate doesn’t have any basis on which to sue them as long as they use their own dialogue and their own characters ....” The “Blurred Lines” case pushed against that limitation, claiming that there was more to music than just the core melodies. The 2015 court case ushered in an era of fear into the music industry as labels suddenly began to question what exactly would send them to court while the outcome in court was ultimately much harder to predict. 

The music industry has been on edge ever since “Blurred Lines”, concerned that the affirmative ruling for the plaintiffs will set a new precedent for copyright infringement in the courts. However, according to an analysis of data compiled from GW Law School’s Musical Copyright Resource, the concerns seem to be largely unfounded, at least as far as the courts are concerned. However, it’s the reaction of the public which seems to be most intriguing. 

Before the Blurred Lines case, the average number of cases between 2010-2015 was four cases a year. After the court decision in 2015, the average number of cases between 2016-2021 increased to 13,  more than tripling previous years’ average. 

<iframe title="Number of US Copyright Cases Brought to Court Over Last Century   (Copy)" aria-label="Interactive line chart" id="datawrapper-chart-U6zwy" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/U6zwy/2/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="400"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script> 


It’s hard to necessarily claim correlation but, notably, the extreme spike falls almost exactly on the date that “Blurred Lines” went to court. 

Charles Cronin, Project Director of the GW Law Schools Musical Copyright Resource who began the project in the 1980s, believes this uptick is the result of ploys for cash by musicians and lawyers alike. “And these… plaintiffs typically, are represented by attorneys who are working on a contingency fee basis, which means they will get a… portion of any settlement or award, that results from the ultimate disposition of the case. And this raises, I think, the very strong possibility, if not probability, that many of these cases are brought as simply a means of shaking down a successful defendant to get a handout to get them to go away,” Cronin said. 

Looking at the ways courts have decided in recent years Cronin’s suspicion may not be unfounded, at least initially. In 2016, 45% percent of the cases put before the court were settled between the plaintiffs and defendants, often for undisclosed amounts of money. That’s opposed to less than one percent in 2015. Led Zeppelin and Katy Perry's respective wins in appeals this year have [many breathing a sigh of relief](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/24/arts/music/blurred-lines-led-zeppelin-copyright.html), but it's yet to be seen if cases will ever return to previous levels. 

When Jaszi discussed this uptick he said, “I cannot prove this but I suspect that the uptick in filings that you observed is a function of that shared belief that... “Blurred Lines” was going to be the beginning of a new dispensation on music copyright. Of course, it wasn’t.” That’s the thing, “Blurred Lines” doesn’t look to have changed the way courts decide things very much at all. 

<iframe title="Complaining genres post Blurred Lines" aria-label="Interactive area chart" id="datawrapper-chart-uN4dP" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/uN4dP/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="400"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

As far as which genres are taken to court “Blurred Lines” again doesn’t seem to have any clear consequences. The fluctuations don’t seem to follow any patterns surrounding “Blurred Lines” except to spike after the decision, which is most likely just a result of the increase in cases. There is a spike again in 2020, when case filings rose, perhaps in reaction to a jury decision against Katy Perry (challenged by Christian rapper Flame for her song “Dark Horse”) but which was overturned in an appeals court earlier this year. 

Despite the fears of many music industry experts and copyright lawyers, courts haven’t seemed to give any more credence to flimsy court cases than before. As far as court decisions are concerned, as Cronin says, “The outcome of the “Blurred Lines” case is considered an outlying travesty, corrected by Zeppelin which followed.”

 While the number of cases has largely remained inflated, courts have continued to dismiss cases outright even more frequently than they grant Summary Judgments. After settlements, court dismissals (marked as Court Decisions in the graph) made up the largest portion of decisions. This should be a comfort to many who feared that “Blurred Lines” marked a new philosophy in musical copyright law. 

<iframe title="Court Decisions by Year" aria-label="Stacked Bars" id="datawrapper-chart-0O3PK" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/0O3PK/1/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="374"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

 Again, the most significant change in final rulings was the number of settlements. Overall, the average number of settlements over five-year periods increased 700% after “Blurred Lines”. That data only includes cases that went to court, it doesn't account for artists who preemptively settled before anyone ever filed. Granted, settlements are sometimes speculatively more indicative of artists granting plaintiff's rightful credit without having their names dragged through the court, but the significance in this increase still could raise eyebrows. The number of settlements has also fallen significantly in the past two years returning to almost pre-“Blurred Lines” levels, which is undoubtedly reassuring to artists and record companies. 

One thing of note is that two of the three cases decided in the past five years, including “Blurred Lines”, were for the plaintiff and contrary to what a lot of musical experts find appropriate. While one of those cases was then overturned by a judge in 2020, this trend has led many in the industry to wonder if a ‘jury of one’s peers’ truly is the best people to decide matters of musical copyright. A 2019 [Variety](https://variety.com/2019/biz/news/katy-perry-dark-horse-lawsuit-joyful-noise-chilling-effect-on-songwriting-1203292606/) article reports that some experts were concerned that judges and juries simply didn’t have the expertise to decide cases in musical copyright and should go before expert panels rather than a jury of one's peers. Musical and legal experts alike have pointed out how juries are not infallible to misleading testimonies. 

In his [Youtube video on the Katy Perry jury decision](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ytoUuO-qvg),  Adam Neely addresses Todd Decker, the plaintiff’s expert on the “Dark Horse” case, directly: “I sincerely doubt you would make the arguments that you made in court at an academic conference… because your academic peers would absolutely eviscerate you for saying some of those things. And yet, in front of a jury of your peers, you told them. These are non-experts, these aren’t musicians and they were confused by your jargon…” It points like Neely’s that have led to conclusions like the ones expressed by experts in Variety.

Jaszi disagrees with such arguments, “I'm static in the sense that I think that jurors are easily swayed. I'm critical in the sense that it is the role of lawyers to try to counteract that effect. And I'm unpersuaded that music presents a special case of what is really a general phenomenon in copyright law.” Essentially, it is up to the lawyers to argue their cases well, not for jury members to be experts on musical theory and copyright law.

 Judith Finell, a musicologist who advises companies like HBO and served as the expert witness for the Gaye foundation in “Blurred Lines”, is also skeptical about removing juries from musical copyright, “It's really the job of the attorneys and the experts to make it clear enough to the people that they can make a reasonable decision…. It can't just be in the opinion of one of the musicians, it really has to be perceived by other human beings who are in a position to say guilty or not guilty, just like any other form of crime, right? It's a form of theft. But if you can only prove that something was taken.”

Given recent court decisions, it seems that calls for expert panels in place of juries may be prematurely reactive. The Katy Perry jury decision was vacated in an appeals court this year and the Led Zeppelin jury decided in the defendant’s favor, not allowing the plaintiffs to claim copyright over the chord progressions and melody many associates with “Stairway to Heaven.”  Finally, as the data in this article indicates, very few cases ever go in front of juries, to begin with, seeming to indicate that the courts themselves haven’t significantly changed their attitude towards copyright in the wake of “Blurred Lines.” 
##Beyond the Courts 
While “Blurred Lines” seems to be an outlier rather than a new precedent in the courts,  its effects are felt in ways that weren’t documented in court filings. With amateurs being able to flood the internet with their accusations of copyright infringement, artists are increasingly under scrutiny for their music and whether or not it is paying proper credit to the Fcreators that preceded it. Artists are losing credence over their artistic expression and the money they earned, just to avoid a court case. And artists aren’t the only ones losing out, music fans are too.

[According to a report from Rolling Stone](https://www.rollingstone.com/pro/features/music-copyright-lawsuits-chilling-effect-935310/) earlier this year, musicologists are increasingly employed by musicians in attempts to avoid copyright lawsuits. Essentially, musicologists are advising artists on how to make their songs distinct enough to avoid copyright infringement. This practice may be a useful legal tool, but it brings up questions about artistic expression. No artistic creation was created in a vacuum. It’s the nature of all art that it's influenced or inspired by the creations that proceed it. 

In a world where similarities and influences are just time bombs for court cases, new songs could be getting crushed under this bizarre form of self-censorship, tucked away for similarities that may not legally be significant. Artists are thereby shouldering not only creative responsibilities in the recording room but legal ones as well. “It strikes me as writing music with a musicologist and a lawyer in the room, that's a lot of that's a lot of weight for an artist to carry....” Jaszi said. 

Finnel, who works with companies from Disney on CBS advising on this very subject, acknowledges that this fear might be a real one, but believes that if musicologists are doing their job, it shouldn’t be too large a problem, at least not legally. “... that [creative instincts being stymied] could happen if you were to advise artists not to write like anyone else in the same style. But if you're actually just advising artists, not to cut, not to lift exact music that's deliberately imitating someone else's music, then that would be sort of the best approach that takes judgment and knowledge.” Hopefully, musicologists should know their craft better than that. 

Accusations of copying are now coming from fans rather than artists, as perfect mashups and similar note progressions, “vibes of songs” which are not subject to copyright, are confused for stealing. However, Cronin doesn't think that such public-sourced outcry will necessarily translate to court action,  “I don’t think courts take that into account much, they’re not supposed to. Nevertheless, it may affect the parties that are bringing the suit.” 

Finell too, was doubtful about public discourse affecting the courts, “... Usually, when I read online opinions, by perhaps non-musicians, or non-musicologist, some of the similarities that people pick up….There's a lot of misunderstanding and misconceptions about what matters in music when it comes to copyright-protected action. And so sometimes it's only stylistic, and it's just nothing concrete.” Legally, then, the public masses may not be the greatest threat to artistic freedom but it certainly begins to bring up the important question of how to properly acknowledge and at times offer monetary credit to influences, especially as fan culture increasingly becomes a loyalist one. 
  
The line between when to acknowledge the artistic influence and when to give monetary credit can be a difficult one to draw. And it may be beyond the scope of the courts to say. Jaszi put it this way: “... If the effect of this sort of consciousness-raising, or to cause people to behave more, or honestly a generous way. That would be, that would be great. But it wouldn't be law, it would be a change in practice.” In that, Jaszi is correct. The trick now is navigating the court of public opinion and convincing fans that proper credit has been given.

So while courts have withstood the onslaught, claims presumably filed under the hope that  “Blurred Lines” changed the way courts treated musical copyright. However, the questions it raised about influence and credit are still circulating in the public sphere. In a world where artists admitting admiration for other artists is used as fodder for allegations of theft, artists may err on the side of caution and not speak openly of their influences and thereby deny proper credit to those who came before them. There needs to be space for fair deference to influence without legal ramifications in the art world because without it, who knows what artists and songs could be buried under the fears of copyright lawsuits or public derision. The only question is whether the court of public opinion will allow it.





