---
layout: post
title:  "Women are paying more than men for similar products, and states are reaping the benefits"
date:   2021-12-14 18:45:00
categories: final
img: pinktax.jpg
author: Lia Chien 
categories: [one]
---


Imagine you head into the store, going straight to the women's section to buy a new pair of dress pants for your upcoming job interview. You're in desperate need of high-quality, professional slacks, but can't afford to spend an unlimited amount. The cheapest pair you can find is $119. You reason with yourself that they're worth the cost and head to the register to check out. As your cashier says, "That'll be $119," the person next to you, buying the same pair of dress pants, yet from the men's section, is only being charged $98. You frown and wonder how you're possibly paying more than them, but sigh and reluctantly slide your card into the machine.

## Data from 2021

On average, women pay more than men for the same products. Ranging from baby clothes and children's toys to adult clothing to senior care items and medications, products designed for women are, on average, more expensive than those geared towards men. Based on a 2015 study conducted by the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs, "women's products cost 7 percent more than similar products for men." Since 2015, prices have increased for women's clothing and toiletries but decreased for children's clothing and toys and senior care items geared towards girls and women. From data collected in 2021, on average, adult clothing is $4.61 more expensive for women, and women's toiletries cost $1.15 more than men's. Children's items cost $0.29 less for girls and senior care items and medicine for women has decreased in price by $0.43. 

<iframe title="Difference in Price for Adult Clothing, Children's Clothing/Toys, Toiletries, and Senior Care Items in 2021" aria-label="Grouped Bars" id="datawrapper-chart-t4zFG" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/t4zFG/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="479"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

## Data from 2015

The New York City Department of Consumer Affairs determined that in 2015, for children's clothes and toys, products for girls were $1.45 more on average than those for boys. Additionally, on average, adult women paid $2.91 more for clothing, while women also paid $0.07 more for toiletries and $1.98 more for senior care items and medications. 

"Women are paying thousands of dollars more over the course of their lives to purchase similar products as men," states the 2015 report.

For this article, the term "women" and products "geared towards women" are defined as those that an individual who identifies as female would purchase, not necessarily only for those who were assigned female at birth.

<iframe title="Difference in Price for Adult Clothing, Children's Clothing/Toys, Toiletries, and Senior Care Items in 2015" aria-label="Grouped Bars" id="datawrapper-chart-bT51O" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/bT51O/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="479"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>


However, the price gap is not necessarily just individual preference and societal standards of genders. The price gap comes from a structured system invisible to the ordinary consumer. 

## Structures and substitution

"[C]hoices made by manufacturers and retailers result in a greater financial burden for female consumers than for male consumers," reports the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs.

Yet, it is not the manufacturer or retail companies that take on the responsibility of this higher price. Instead, it is the average American consumer that is forced to pay this greater number. 

"The burden is on the female consumer as it is on women in a wide variety of issues," says Anna Bessendorf, the author of the New York Consumer Affairs Project, ["From Cradle to Cane: The Cost of Being a Female Consumer."](https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/dca/downloads/pdf/partners/Study-of-Gender-Pricing-in-NYC.pdf) This type of "pink tax" is still undertaken by the ordinary American consumer, resulting in a financial burden for a large portion of the United States population.

To understand the cause of gender pricing, knowledge of product substitution is essential. Overall, women's products have fewer substitutes than men's, meaning that they have fewer options if a brand changes the product or its size. 

"Because women are more insensitive to a price change because they don't have close substitutes, we might expect the prices to be higher for many women's clothing items and anything that fits that pattern," says Mary Hansen, a professor of economics at American University in Washington, D.C.

Without close substitutes, female consumers are forced to change brands or sizes and typically spend more money to have access to products that fit their body type and appeal to them.

"If you are a consumer woman and you went to X brand and you know that those jeans and that shirt fit you, probably next season somebody somewhere decided to change the cut, which usually meant you had to change your size," says Renee Villandry, a past retail manager at Banana Republic and Loft.

Female consumers are then faced with the added burden of finding new brands and sizes that work for them, as well as the higher prices. "You only get price equality when stuff is perfectly substitutable for each other," states Hansen.

## Population differences

Furthermore, since the initial study was conducted in New York City, it is crucial to study the gender breakdown of one of the most densely populated areas in the nation. Using data from the U.S. Census, it was found that New York City has a slightly higher percentage of women than the national average.

<iframe title="Percentage of US and NYC Population by Gender in 2019" aria-label="Grouped Bars" id="datawrapper-chart-ZccM7" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/ZccM7/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="313"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>


On the national level, women make up 50.8% of the population. New York City has 1.5% more women than the national average, with a population of 4.3 million total women, making it so the higher average prices of necessary items inflict a large burden on the majority of those who live in the largest metropolitan area of the country.

With just over half of the U.S. population identifying as female and as consumers for these women-geared products, there is a significant financial burden that over half the population takes on. This pricing issue, therefore, affects a multitude of individuals, not just a small group.

## Pay gaps

Additionally, it is crucial to look at the payment gaps between men and women in New York City and the entire United States. New York City comprises 10 congressional districts, which are diagrammed below by combining them into New York City’s five boroughs, displaying the pay gap of men's and women's median earnings.


<iframe title="Pay Gap in New York City for Median Earnings" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-75XUY" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/75XUY/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="766"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>


In every congressional district except for three, women earn substantially less than men, averaging a pay gap of $5,273 per year, yet is below both the state and national average. 

New York state averages a pay gap of $8,541 based on data from the Joint Economic Committee from the United States Congress. The map below depicts the pay gaps by congressional districts of the entire state.


<iframe title="Pay Gap in New York by Congressional District for Men's and Women's Median Earnings" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-8oU8q" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/8oU8q/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="611"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>


Comparatively, New York City averages a smaller pay gap, with three congressional districts where women earn on average more than men. However, in districts outside the city, the pay gap increases far beyond the state and national averages.

For the United States as a whole, women's median earnings average $9,955 per year less than men, yet they still pay higher prices for similar goods as depicted above. Pay gaps vary across states, as seen below.


<iframe title="Pay Gap by Median Earnings for Men and Women by State" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-SOkLA" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/SOkLA/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="503"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>


Across the nation, women are affected by pay gaps and higher prices. In every state, on average, women earn less than men, which greatly impacts the quality of life women can live. Yet, states reap the most benefits from the higher prices women face, especially from the taxes imposed on menstrual products, which are necessary to a menstruating consumer's livelihood. 

## The pink tax

According to Period Equity, a legal organization dedicated to achieving menstruation equity, only 23 of the 50 U.S. states do not impose a tax on menstrual products. 


<iframe title="States and &quot;Pink Tax&quot; Status " aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-ei5Q9" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/ei5Q9/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="469"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>


With more than half the country imposing taxes on products necessary for a menstruator's natural bodily function, people who menstruate are facing the financial burden that states monetarily benefit from. This tax garners thousands of dollars for the states and takes away crucial funds from menstruators.


<iframe title="Total State Revenue from &quot;Pink Tax&quot; Per Capita (in billions)" aria-label="Map" id="datawrapper-chart-HPBZQ" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/HPBZQ/3/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="483"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>


As we can see, states are taking vital funds away from those that need it most. Additionally, in states like North Dakota and Wyoming, pay gaps are higher and states are making more money from the pink tax, taking more funds from menstruators who already face a lower income.

In areas like these, those who menstruate and/or identify as women are faced with the highest financial burden. Higher flat prices of products geared towards women and taxes imposed on necessary items for menstruators creates a consequential effect on the women’s and menstruators' lives.

"The best thing that women can really do is have awareness and choose alternatives when they're available," offers Bessendorf.

## Change across the nation

Economics, taxes, and price points govern much of an American’s life and societal values. With the data found and reported on, women are paying more than men for similar products, and states are gaining substantial revenue for this process. Those who identify as women and menstruators then face the monetary effects of these actions throughout their lives. 

Yet, change is currently and constantly taking place across the country. In 2021 alone, Louisiana and Vermont have eliminated the pink tax and 36 pieces of legislation have been introduced in other state legislatures aimed at removing this tax, four of which are still in session, according to Period Equity. Prices on average for children's clothing and toys geared towards girls' and women's senior care items have also dropped.

"If parents are buying the same toys for their boys and girls, that means the toys are increasingly substitutes and that's exactly…the kind of place where you would see minimal price differences between target markets," remarks Hansen, providing economic insight to the growing movement for unisex baby and children's items. 

With more individuals choosing to consume beyond the binary lines, therefore avoiding gender-based price barriers, society is evolving to know an economy without these implementations. 

Social movements and societal acceptance of loosening the binary on consumer goods help lessen the burden of substitution on women. 

"To the extent that social trends lead to previously gendered products really being substitutes for large portions of the population," Hansen states, "you're not going to see those [price] differences."

By moving away from gender-based products and reducing the binary labels throughout society, we look towards a more equitable, inclusive consumer future.
