---
layout: post
title:  "The World’s Largest MLM has Given Millions to Republicans to Restrict the Rights of Their Sellers"
date:   2021-12-14 20:39:00
categories: final
img: donations.png
author: Spaulding Bingaman
categories: [one]
---


> "Pain is temporary, but your dreams are going to last forever if you let them." 

Now this is Adrian Mitchell’s self-described credo that he aspires to live by for the rest of his life; however, just two years ago, this was the furthest thing from his mind. After silently struggling with his mental health throughout his youth, Adrian decided to drop out of college in 2018 and seek professional help. Although things were somewhat better after seeing a psychologist and returning home, Adrian’s life took another twist when he was diagnosed with MS. "I just kept fighting in the hopes that I could reach out and grab that light at the end of the tunnel," Adrian said. But he didn’t grab the light. One day as he was scrolling through Instagram, a friend from college direct messaged Adrian with a proposal that he says, "saved my life." Adrian had received an offer to join Monat, a billion-dollar shampoo and wellness company, as a "Market Partner." With the promise of "being his own boss" and "living life on his own terms," all Adrian had to do was pay $200 recruitment fee and he would receive personalized training, a variety of company products, and a fresh start. The light grabbed him. 

## A Dream With Some Strings Attached

Monat is a Multi-level Marketing (MLM) company, a type of business that is primarily predicated on independent sellers who sell product and recruit more sellers. While Monat’s social media account and website present the vouge-like appearance and lavish looking products one would come to expect of a modern beauty company, their business model could not be more different. With [billions of dollars in sales](https://www.dsa.org/statistics-insights/factsheets) across the US, powerful MLMs like Monat wield an incredible amount of power over their sellers and the governmental regulations that they abide by.

Although Adrian believes that he has had a "personal rebirth" due to his newfound purpose and community he developed throughout his year-long tenure selling for Monat, his experience is  not reflective of all newly initiated Market Partners. Gemma Miller, an ex-seller for Monat, talked with me about her vastly differing experience working for Monat. "They didn’t treat me like I was even human," Gemma recounted as she looked back upon her time within the company. Gemma estimates that she lost thousands of dollars selling for Monat because of the "constant pressure from leadership" to buy more products to advertise on her social media. Furthermore, Gemma described the social isolation she felt after having tried to "rope everyone I knew" into the business just as her uplines had told her to do. Compared to the typical door-knocking MLM selling of the past, Monat’s business is conducted exclusively through social media, with their sellers posing as quasi-influencers. 

Although MLMs have different internal structures, they all share a rank system by which sellers can "rank-up" to different tiers by achieving a targeted goal of sales and recruits. While MLMs have often been compared to pyramid schemes due to the high monetary incentive to recruit others, they are currently legal under US law and were reported to have made upwards of $40 billion in sales [last year](https://www.dsa.org/statistics-insights/factsheets). However, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) nonetheless harshly advises against joining an MLM due to their financially disparate results. A study conducted by the FTC [analyzed](https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/public_comments/trade-regulation-rule-disclosure-requirements-and-prohibitions-concerning-business-opportunities-ftc.r511993-00008%C2%A0/00008-57281.pdf. ) the income breakdowns of more than 30 MLMs and found that nearly 99.6% of sellers in an MLM lose money. Although masses of publicly available studies that share similar findings should reasonably ward off anyone from joining an MLM, the Direct Selling Association (DSA) [reported](https://www.dsa.org/statistics-insights/factsheets) that there are nearly 8 million "direct sellers" currently operating in the US. While the DSA operates on behalf of almost all prominent MLMs, their privately collected data should not be readily ignored. Because most MLMs keep their financial data relatively close to their chest, it is difficult to accurately quantify their business operations. However, Amway, which brought in $8.5 billion in revenue in 2020 and is often credited as the world’s largest MLM, has droves of publicly available data from a surprisingly obvious source.

Since 1990, Amway has made over $20 million dollars in political donations to politicians and campaigns through their holding company, Alticor. Because all political donations are legally required to be accessible by the public, every recipient of Alticor’s donations can be viewed on the Federal Elections Committee’s (FEC) website. Due to a lack of any internal data from prominent MLMs, their political donations and lobbied bills can glean some insight as to what governmental changes they wish to see in relation to sellers like Adrian. 

## Amway and the Republican Party

Amway has heavily supported the Republican party according to an analysis of two decades worth of political donations. More specifically, over 99% of their political donations have gone towards Republican campaigns and advocacy groups.

<iframe title="Alticor/Amway Donations Since 2012" aria-label="Interactive line chart" id="datawrapper-chart-nhfNV" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/nhfNV/4/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="360"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow=e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

But this is not a new revelation. Alticor’s relationship with the Republican party has been strong for almost two decades. One month before the November 1994 elections, Alticor donated nearly $2.5 million dollars to the GOP, the [largest political donation in history](https://www.motherjones.com/politics/1996/09/she-did-it-amway/) for a single election at one time. Following the GOP sweep in 1994, Amway co-founder Richard DeVos was personally honored by future Senate President and Republican Nominee Bob Dole at a lavish fundraising event. Since 2012, Alticor’s top recipient of funds has been the Republican National Committee, followed by other Republican and conservative-leaning groups.

<iframe title="Top 5 Recipients of Alitcor Donations" aria-label="Stacked Column Chart" id="datawrapper-chart-cclOQ" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/cclOQ/2/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="315"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

In addition to the massive amount of money poured into national Republican groups, Alticor has donated nearly $850,000 to the Michigan Republican Party, the state where their headquarters reside. Not including the massive contribution to Dick DeVos’ bid for the governor of Michigan, the DeVos personal donations also align quite heavily with that of Alticor as well, marking another visible trend in the data.

<iframe title="DeVos Family Donations Since 1996" aria-label="Pie Chart" id="datawrapper-chart-lH0Nf" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/lH0Nf/2/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="582"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

Following their largest year of political spending in 2016, Betsey DeVos, daughter-in-law of Richard DeVos and husband of former Amway president Dick DeVos, was nominated by President Trump to serve as his Secretary of Education. While it is obvious that there is a link between the most powerful MLM and the Republican party, following money trail can give insight as to why.

## The Money Trail

In addition to their political donations, Alticor also engages in a substantial amount of lobbying every year. By looking at the specific bills that Alticor has put hundreds of thousands of dollars towards, some insight can be gained as to how they view their employees and products. Edgar Vasquez, an analyst for the lobbying firm Invariant told me "Companies like Alticor often hire people like us to act as ‘middlemen’ with lawmakers" to advocate on behalf of policies that they see as being advantageous. Spending roughly $500,000 dollars a year on lobbying, Alticor has continually pushed legislation to deem their sellers as "independent contractors" as opposed to employees. Recently, Alticor lobbied the *New GIG Act of 2019*, alongside other companies such as Uber and Lyft. Introduced by Congressman Tom Rice, a recipient of Alticor money, the *NEW Gig Act of 2019*, produces a legal statute that would restrict millions of employees from gaining many benefits were they to be labeled as independent contractors. Because the Affordable Care Act (ACA) imposes a hefty penalty on businesses over fifty employees that do not provide healthcare to at least 95% their employees, the nomenclature change to "independent contractor" subverts this fine. Additionally, independent contractors are not included within minimum wage requirements, federal discrimination laws, and labor regulations, leaving them with virtually no government protection. While an argument can be made that MLM sellers should classify as independent contractors, the protections that this status affords them severely limits their financial options. Although sellers should do their due diligence regarding their employers, vulnerable individuals can fall prey to these companies with little recourse should they fall into the 99% of people who lose money within an MLM. Adrian, who continues to struggle with his mental health and MS, is about to turn twenty-six, the age when he is no longer eligible to be covered under his mother’s health insurance. While Alticor and other prominent MLMs lobby millions of dollars to label their employees as independent contractors, Adrian is trying to find a way to pay for his future medical bills without the help of his employer. Because the Republican party has so often declared itself as the "party of small government" and resented intrusive business regulation, the lack of protections for independent contractors within MLMs makes it nearly impossible for struggling sellers to "pull themselves up by their bootstraps." 

Although numerous Congressmembers have received donations from Alticor, there are currently thirteen house members and twelve senators in Congress that have both received money from Alticor and introduced a bill that the MLM has lobbied. 

<iframe title="Current Congressional Members Supported by Alticor*" aria-label="Table" id="datawrapper-chart-UxOOs" src="https://datawrapper.dwcdn.net/UxOOs/2/" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" style="width: 0; min-width: 100% !important; border: none;" height="878"></iframe><script type="text/javascript">!function(){"use strict";window.addEventListener("message",(function(e){if(void 0!==e.data["datawrapper-height"]){var t=document.querySelectorAll("iframe");for(var a in e.data["datawrapper-height"])for(var r=0;r<t.length;r++){if(t[r].contentWindow===e.source)t[r].style.height=e.data["datawrapper-height"][a]+"px"}}}))}();
</script>

While some could write off these donations as being purely coincidental, Tim Walberg and Marsha Blackburn stand out as being the top two recipients of Alticor money. Unsurprisingly, both members played a role in the Congressional Direct Selling Caucus, a group of Congressmembers who advocate on behalf of MLM sellers and executives. Blackburn, the founder of the caucus has since left due to her election to the Senate, while Walberg continues to serve in the coalition. Amway wields a tremendous amount of power as the world’s largest MLM, and it is the duty of consumers, sellers, and politicians to recognize these schemes and curb their influence.
## Persevering Through the Pain
Although the Republican and Democrat parties have been ideologically separated for decades regarding the proper extent of business regulations, the unchecked power and overwhelmingly harmful impacts of MLMs should be a sign to Republicans that their tactics are not working. But partisan bickering means nothing to sellers like Adrian. When asked about the future medical expenses that he will have to pay without the help of his employers, Adrian once again repeated his moto. "Pain is temporary, but your dreams are going to last forever if you let them." While he is still at the first rank of Monat, Adrian nonetheless pursues his dream of helping others, hoping that his pain is indeed temporary. 
 